Okay, again, thank you very much, everyone. Thank you again. All my Dharma friends, thank
you very much for participating. And again, we are doing Dzogchen retreat about one week
or the more. And it's wonderful we all get together and had the opportunity to discuss
the teaching of the gracious teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, or Guru Padmasambha, lineage master,
according our capabilities. And in a way, refreshing, reactivating our knowledge and
the memories, the teaching that we received from so many great masters one after another.
So today, we really, in a way, reactivating that according my capabilities to, in a way,
reminding to all of us. It's not something that I have offered to you as something new,
completely brand new, or something come up. It's all teachings of the gracious teacher,
Buddha Shakyamuni, lineage masters, and I try to follow that footstep according my capabilities
of utmost capabilities and hear that to each other in a way to remind each other. So that's
what is all what we're doing. And particularly this time, we're discussing of the Dzogchen
teachings, which is so important, so powerful, so precious, so, so great practices, yet is
down to the earth. Humble, simple, more contentment, filled heart with both each other, relative
to both each other. When we have heart filled with related to both each other, then the
absolute both each other of Dzogchen shines in the heart. It comes up really perfectly.
So that's what we're really trying to do that. And again, and for that reasons, again, every
great masters, all great practitioners, the Buddha, everyone said, post is so important
to participate in the teaching and to participate in that. And that, but second, the most important
is correcting the motivation, correcting the motivation. What gracious teacher Buddha Shakya
Swami says, everything is a condition. That condition is our mind. Every, every, everything
is a demand after growth is had need conditions. That also indicating we have the perfect cause.
We all of us had the perfect cause, many times lacking the conditions. And this time we like
to explore our goodness, our abundance of the Buddha nature or Dzogchen teaching, Dzogchen,
not just Dzogchen teaching, Dzogchen. Dzogchen is not coming from outside. And what is the
very word Dzogchen? Many times it's oscillated in the English. Great completions or great
perfect, but that great perfect, that great completion is not outside. We're looking.
It's within the heart, within the mind. That is one voice said from the Mahayana Sutra,
all the way to Dzogchen teaching is within us. That is what we're going to explore. But
to explore, we need conditions. That condition is also coming from outside. Everything is
equipped with us. The old tools to discover is everything with us. That condition, what
great teacher said, everything is caused with conditions. That condition is motivation.
Motivation. What is motivation? Motivation is nothing but our own mind. Our mind, your
mind and my mind. Who control the mind? No one else control our mind except ours. 100%
one. Each of us control our own mind. So where we like to lead our destination, according
to Buddhism or with us and all the great masters is to the motivation. We like to, for example,
always talk of the goodness. Everyone really goodness, good motivation. Everyone don't
care of the goodness, then be careful. Be kind of like carry away or with our old habitu,
manding, manding habitu patterns like carries. Then what the destination will be? According
to Buddhism, the destination will be continually going in the samsara, from samsara to the
samsara. Instead going from nirvana or the bhumi to the bhumi or the path to the path
or realization to the realization we are heading to the samsara, from samsara to the samsaras.
To change that direction is no one's in hand except ourself according to Buddha teaching.
That is motivation. Therefore, correct in the motivation is so important. This time,
what kind of correct? What kind of motivation actually exists? Generally, in a correct teacher,
Buddha is teaching. There are so many motivations. Motivation means mind. There are so many.
But we can summarize that into three. Good motivation, bad motivation, neutral motivations.
Or positive, negative, neutral. And this time, teaching says correct in the motivation to
the good. Good motivation. That again is summarized by the lineage masters that you all know.
We've known vastness, skillful means motivation. Vastness, skillful means motivation. No, sorry.
I made mistakes. Vastness motivation, skillful means motivation. So this true mind, true
motivation. Vastness motivation of the Mahayana suttas. Skillful means motivation of the Vedayana
teachings. These true motivations. We have the abundance of both teachings. Suttara teachings
and Vedayana teachings. Because kindness, courage, and the commitment of the ancient
those great masters, particularly known as Garpa and Masambhava, and great master Shandarakkita,
and great Dharma Kintusandapri, with all those great athletics and Indian masters,
made such a big effort to bring the entire teaching of the Buddha into Tibet. So therefore,
all the Tibetan Buddhists, Buddhisms are enjoying abundance, the richness of the Buddha's teaching,
without missing any Buddha's teaching that exists in this world that will have, that will have to
be,
or that we can get enlightenment within these lifetimes. And therefore, we have two motivations.
Skillful, vastness motivation of the Suttarayana teachings and skillful means
motivation of the Vedayana teachings. What these two motivations are generally? Again,
is nothing, any that you all know, except actually, you all know vastness motivation is bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta, wishing bodhicitta, a relative true bodhicitta, relative bodhicitta, wishing, vastness.
Why is it called vastness? Because bodhicitta has no boundaries. That we know, right? We all know,
we heard that, and we're practicing that. Has no boundaries, no restrictions. And to all the
beings, how many beings there, according to Buddha's teaching, that as far as space goes,
that far there is living beings. As long as there is living beings, that much,
everyone has karma, everyone has emotions. Everyone is struggling, that means karma and
emotions. It's pervasive to all the beings. Therefore, our bodhicitta is to all the beings,
wishing good things, particularly this time, today I'm going there. And I'm today, and as
well as for one week or 10 days, I'm going to practice of Dzogchen. Dzogchen made that become
the cause to bring everyone as joy, peace, happiness now, but deep down may completely
eliminate the cause of trouble, difficulty, and challenges. Really, we sincerely from the heart.
Part, our intention, motivation, swinging with it, with the aspirations, supreme aspirations of
the great bodhisattvas or the Buddhas, join Dzogchen, let that spirit ripple all the
Northern light, and just spread out all the morning sunlight to everyone, rich from the heart.
Really
rich, and then apply all the bodhicitta teaching we have, we received. That is known as vastness
motivation of the bodhicitta, according to Mahayana suttas. Skill means the motivation of the
Vedayana teaching, vast upon that motivation, the suttas of Mahayana motivation, with the
compassion, with the bodhicitta, and now what skill means? Vedayana teaching is Mahayana teaching,
but it has more skillful means as we all know. We all heard that. And what are those skillful
means? This has so many skillful way, so many techniques to way discover our Buddha-natural,
and so many skillful way to clarify our obscurations. Because of those skillful means,
the technique is not too difficult to do. Hard shapes, a little bit more easy approach,
and we keep our mindfulness, a joyful effort, and concentration. Then it is quite easy, not
difficult. So those are, why? Because a lot of skillful means. So this time, the bodhicitta,
our vastness motivation of the bodhicitta is combined with the motivation, skillful means
motivation. That is, then, simple to explain. There are three Vedya states. All forms are
Vedya forms. What that means, Vedya? Enlightenment. All forms are enlightenment. All the sounds are
enlightenment. And all the mind and space are enlightened. Why use the Vedya? According to
teaching, Vedya means indestructible. Indestructible. This enlightenment, what we're
activating of these three forms, sound and space, mind, enlightenment is never going to change.
It's reality. It's ultimate, ordinary nature. But we don't see now. Why? Because of our duality.
That very we want to purify. That hindrance we want to purify. That's a simple way. Then
like to come in a little more extensive ways, skillful means the motivation, what is
perfect status. Perfect pure land, or perfect land, perfect teacher, perfect retinues,
audience, and perfect teaching, and perfect time. Those are the five perfects. You activate those
qualities. This is now, again, not just making up these things or trying to pertend this.
It's reality. We are recapturing our dominion, our inheritance, our share, our opportunities.
According to the Buddha's teaching, we lost that our origin dominion because carried by the
force of the dualities, habit patterns. We went always looking outside, looking out,
and further and further we went. That ripple is carried, that tide of the duality has been carried
from our source completely. It's kind of carried. But today by the teaching of the great teacher
Buddha Shakta Muni and Gaurab and Masambhava, we are returning back to our original dominion.
That our original place where we belong, where we are, actually we never lost.
Only we had the nightmare carried. Carried far, far. That is what we're really doing. Therefore,
then activating those bodies and those motivations is so important because they're teaching.
Really, so important. Teaching all the great masters, everyone said, so important. That will
change. That will change from deep, not from surface, outside somewhat. Change from the very
fundamental. So therefore, with all those beautiful motivations. With that beautiful motivations,
then now we follow with the teaching. And the teaching is again zoki teaching, zoki teaching,
and it's taught by the great master. The manjushri who came in whom he found is great master Mohar
ambhut.
And of course, many of you already know, all read, so I won't repeat that. If you like,
I mean the Moharambhut is one of the great masters, great scholars, great logicians,
great portraitists, great alchemists. He's really in the debate history in the Buddhist all the
time
and great thinker, but yet he's so humble, simple, drawn to the earth. He's just like as a regular
monk, a practitioner, moving from hermit to hermit. That means from mountain to mountain,
cave with caves. Even he become, and he born as an ordinary person. Nothing kind of fancy and
highlighted all this and that things. In the debate, there are so many of those beings
that who are highlighted. Truly they are very highlighted that. But Moharambhut is one of the,
again, great masters who born as simple families in the 18th century, I think around the 18th
century,
or maybe in the 19th century, sorry, 19th century centuries. And I grew up as a simple person,
and a simple monk started just exactly regular monks, monks. And he see it like that all the time.
It's not something that, and then of course he's called it a realization, understand the knowledge.
It's like genius. He is a genius to knew all the Buddha teachings. They never had to start it like
that. As soon as he received teaching in the transmissions of those teachings, he knew already.
And not guess only that, all the knowledges. He practiced and meditated all the time. He's a great
practitioner. And this gives so many different teachings, so many variety teachings that covers
all the major sciences, and it will be called five sciences. Those really, he give all those
teachings, but regularly he gives teachings of all that are covered in the Buddhist, Buddha's
teachings,
from the first foundation, the foundation teaching of Buddha teaching, all the first teachings,
and all the way to Dokti teachings. And there's more many kind of essence teachings of the
different
teachings, and this is one of his very direct pointed, and very condensed teaching of the Dokti,
Dokti teachings. So now we go here, and we go here, and that now, so now here we,
and page 10, I'm sure you know that, is
the here, the title, the essential point of the effortless profound meditations. So that's what
the translated, I think we translated, the, "Sabdung, Dormi, Gompa, Namdirmi", that's a little bit
old,
but this has what it is. So this is now what Dokti teaches. Again, of course, many of you already,
you all know Dokti, but again, we all here together, and I'm going to tell a little bit Dokti
my understanding, so I will talk again to you Dokti. Generally, where Dokti comes from,
who taught these Dokti teachings? Generally, according Buddhism, Dokti teaching is taught by
the Buddha Shakyamuni. And when he taught, and where he taught this,
Buddha gave that teachings, generally, when he was in India,
India, and that means when? Two thousand, about 600 years ago, the Buddha gave the Dokti teachings.
And where he gave these teachings? He gave these teachings in a known as Pure Land Akanishad.
Pure Land Akanishad. Also, Buddha gave this Dokti teaching. He does not give Dokti teaching,
and his regular form that we see on the statues, one face, two arms, two legs, and
holding with the arms, balls. It's not. And the teachings, he gave this teaching in the form of
a Buddha Samhana Badras. Buddha Samhana Badras. And to whom we give teachings? And all the great
lineage masters, who are there? The lineage master of the mind-to-mind transmission lineages.
Linear master of the symbolic transmission lineages. And what that means? Of course, you
all know. It means they are not just like regular practitioners. They are highly enlightened
practitioners, relative beings. They grade with their dharas, and their buddhas,
male and female buddhas. How he gave this teaching? According to the teaching,
he gave beyond the world and the symbol. Beyond the world. W-O-R-D. And the symbols. He gave.
And how that happened? He said Buddha, relaxed in the meditation, or Buddha, not, I'm sure,
shouldn't use relaxed. Buddha is absolute state of the true nature of the Dharmakaya,
within that natural status. But where is the display? Merged from him, and came from him,
and merged to all this. All this audience. So what they received? They received everything
what Buddha Samyantabad has. All the resists. Same time, Buddha Samyantabad did not lost anything.
So it's completely received that. So even sometimes in teaching said, the Buddha gave that teaching
from the unborn natural status. Unborn natural status. So that's how he received that teaching.
Teachings. Generally, great teacher, Buddha Sakyamuni, when he came this world,
from age 35 onwards, until age 81, he gave variety of teachings. All those teachings.
The ultimate teaching is known as Dzhokhi teachings. So he gave that teachings to the
Selenciyaramas, or Akanishad, or in the Tibet, is known as women. And so he gave those teachings
in there. And that will then continually carried and spread out all that teachings carried.
How this teaching came to the human world. According again to Dzhokhi teaching,
and so now Buddha Samyantabad, or Buddha Sakyamuni, transferred those teachings
to all the five Dhyana Buddhas, and all those Buddhas. And then Rajasathos
transmitted this to the Garab Dorjis. Garab Dorjis. And Garab Dorjis is the first
human Dzhokhi teacher who brought this teaching to this world. How Rajasathos transferred,
in the teaching said, he transferred teaching through the symbolic lineage task techniques.
Not necessarily word and speaking this, but through the sign and the symbols. He taught
these teachings. And Garab Dorjis received completely everything. At the same time, Garab Dorjis
reached enlightenment, become the Buddhas. From Garab Dorjis, they continually carried.
And that is how according teaching, and then it teaches the oral transmission lineages,
continually. Oral transmission lineages. Lineages, so that means Garab Dorjis,
one who hold the mind teaching, so the mind-to-mind transmission lineage, symbolic transmission
lineage,
and oral transmission lineage. And then now he transferred his foremost students to the
Manjushri Mathur, on Jambakini's receipt. Jambakini also reached enlightenment, and he
shared these teachings to his foremost students, which is known as hiri-san.
Now, oral transmission lineage. And hiri-san I shared, and of course it didn't mean that you
don't have the symbolic transmission lineage and mind transmission lineage, that all has now
sharing that. And hiri-san I shared this teaching to them. Then
Ramal Mathur, Gaurab Rama Sambama, and Jana Sutras, those great Dokki masters. Those are in a way
highlight the single lineages. But according to teaching, they have also many other students too.
But that's the Dokki teaching being as single lineages until hiri-san. Hiri-san shared this
teaching to the three great masters, as I said, Gaurab Rama Sambama, Ramal Mathur, and Jana Sutras.
Three masters. And so, Jana Sutras also shared this teaching again to Ramal Mathur. So,
Ramal Mathur becomes as the disciples of the hiri-san, as well as Jana Sutras. So, it's that.
This great, so how this teaching, Dokki teaching came to debate is bought by the three great
masters. Those are post in Gaurab Rama Sambama, and the second is, then, Ramal Mathur, and the
third
is great debate in task later. They bought these teachings. So, that is really how this teaching.
And from that on, then it continues. And in Nyingma, particularly in Nyingma Suku, there is two
major
lineages. Those are known as Kama lineages and Therma lineages. So, those two major lineages
continually preserve this teaching and carried, until now, continually ongoing non-stop or unbroken
lineages of this teaching. So, that is really about how this teaching came and how that exists now.
Now, we go to this one. So, that's really our view of the Dokki, and of course, we can talk
that more those things continue in this.
Now, here, as I said, the title of this teaching, and generally, and always in the teaching said
that this text, the whole, the entire Mahananda teaching can be divided into three kind of sections
.
Three sections. So, those are like title and teaching and the color forms. Those are the common
debating kind of with the structures that way. So, this again, if we do that way, that's it.
Title, teaching and color forms. Now, of course, we go to this title. According to Buddha teaching,
title is really very important. Title tells the summary of the teaching, of the big teaching,
whatever that is. It really tells that. So, therefore, this title captures the condensed
meaning of the teaching, of this teaching. Many times in the teachings, those are
very intelligent, smart, highly capable practitioners. The moment they read the title,
that moment they understand pretty much meaning of the entire books or the teachings, that's it.
So, therefore, that's what I said. The teaching is so important in many ways, I mean that.
And now, we go this way. The first one is here, said, and in it read, it says, "Sabdung surmi
gumba namjane" and here we see the essential point of the effortless profound meditations.
So, if we say the profound, profound, and in it read is "sabdung," profound,
or profound meaning, and we have translated that, "sabdung." What is a "sab" actually?
Or profound. What means profound? Profound is, generally, anything is profound.
Anything is a profound. That's the terminology, profound. But this time, it's referring,
profound, it's the "zokchin." It's zokchin, it's profound. What is zokchin? As I said earlier,
zokchin is not outside. Zokchin is within. And what that means within? Zokchin is our own awareness
.
Our own awareness is zokchin. Zokchin. Why is it called profound? Because
do we see, or do I see, or do you see the drift of your mind, the edge of our mind,
about the mind? You see. We all have the mind, but really do we see anything about this mind
profound, drift, drift of that, and the size of the mind? No. There is no answer. Therefore,
it is profound. This profound nature is the awakening nature,
is ordinary nature. It is, what I said, zokchin. In it a bit, zokwa cembu, zokwa cembu. So this
profound is zokwa cembu. What means zokwa cembu? This is how a great master, first in Cinci,
great in Cinci, explained in his teachings. Zok means, the profound means, the vastness
space of the true nature of dharmatam, which has no boundary, no depth, no edge, no center.
That vastness call it. Within that vastness call is, what is completed? What ever again,
that zokchin, zok every time, pray as the meaning of the completed. What is completed?
That everything is completed. Within that vastness of the vastness performed,
that nature or dharmadhatu status. What means everything? All the phenomena,
poem, sound, space, touch, test, or many times in the teaching said, all the samsara phenomena,
all the nirvana phenomena, path to the nirvana, or the between nirvana and samsara, what in
Buddhism
called path phenomena. P-A-T-H, path phenomena. So that means all the phenomena, three phenomena,
are completed within the zokchin. Within the zok, zok means everything is completed.
How complete it? It's not something big, zokchin, bag, B-A-G, bag, and put all those things inside.
No, not like that. Not like that. Everything, every those three phenomena,
samsara phenomena, nirvana phenomena, path phenomena, all that phenomena,
never separated from that profound nature. Never separated. That means what? The identical,
identical. Nothing, no, there's no any phenomena. It's not pervaded by this vastness.
It's the same nature. For that reason, the great teacher Buddha said, as we take often their
quotations, pranghar suttara, poem is emptiness. Emptiness of home.
Emptiness of home. That union is not negations. It's not just one side. It's not extreme.
It's totally blended in, perfectly, beautifully. Because of that harmonized nature,
then everything can be arising. So beautiful. Magical display. That's what the great teacher
Buddha Shakyamuni and the Buddha teach him, the interdependent coordination, the interdependent
arising, that interconnected arising. All connections. Sometimes also here say the connection,
connections is true. Conditions, conditions. All that things arises. Where they think the arising
is also magical. There's no substantial, social, structural, existing, solid existing.
Moment it appears, that moment is empty. Empty is appeared, that's what. So these are all these
phenomena existing, three phenomena in the teaching set, are completed within these great
profoundness sets. So then, in what the great master first changes said, zho kwa cembu. He
used three words. That's very interesting. I'm a very profound teacher, really. And I thought,
the pa means what? It's one's own awareness. Pa, rukba. Rukba. Where that who understands
that? Where is that actually? For each individualist. Where is this whole phenomena of the samsara?
Where is all phenomena of the nirvana? Where is the phenomena of all that path?
Where is that? It's all within the rukba. Who's going to perceive? Who's going to experience?
Who's going to follow? Who's going to be activating that? No other than the rukba.
Then how that rukba is, in the Dokki teaching set, is already enlightened. And of course,
I'll explain in later too. Already enlightened. What that means? But in Mahayana teaching,
always the enlightenment is three kayas. So rukba is already in three kaya sets.
And that is the older nature, the three kayas, or three wisdom slaters.
And the wisdom of the emptiness, the wisdom of the clarity, the wisdom of the displace.
Even the teaching divided those three different ways. There's not three separate entities,
three different things. All is within. These three kayas or three wisdom, it's not just something
newly developed, newly arises. It is already inherited. Already is here, here. So when we
practice Dokki, what are we doing? The sense is already here. But we are purifying the cover-ups
of this rukba. What cover? All is blocked. That is dualities. And also in the teaching called
obscurations, defilements, those are, we are purifying. What process are we going to purify?
Those are then two merits. Two merits, accumulated merit versus two merits.
And we have to be practical. We have to be diligent. Why we have to be diligent? Because
our habit pattern is completely take over us, our mind streams. In a way, it takes over completely.
When? A long time ago, according to the teaching, from the biggest times, it really takes over that
.
And not just only that, it takes over and that's it. But it added so many habitual patterns because
our conceptions added, added. So now we are completely, according to the teaching, we are
saturated within the habit patterns. We're completely saturated. Even the powerful teaching
of the Dokkin, Dokkin, we need effort, joyful effort, and courage, and commitment, devotion,
and both each other. Those all needed. To keep up, to claim, and liberate, and transform whatever
technique you use, we have to keep up that. So that's what really this, this, that is what
the Dzokwa, Dzokwa, Dzokwa, and the path to separate with the expalant. Then God and Master
first Jesus said, "Chimbu" means what? "Chimbu" is a debate of all, again, means great, great.
He said, because when you have the realization of the Rupa, there's nothing higher realization
than that. There's nothing higher realization. When you discover your own authentic Rupa,
Rupa or the ordinary awareness, there's nothing else higher realization than there is.
Even the Buddhas and Bodhisattva came to tell you that is not high. There's nothing really higher
more than that. This is completely the highest levels of realization. So that is what Dzokkin,
Dzokkin is, Dzokwa, Chimbu. So that is performed. This is the profound teaching,
profound. Then, so that is, and then in the debate here, in the debate, there is
"don", "sabdons", that profound meanings, if I go over this, profound meanings.
And the profound meanings, what meanings? That means when you have this realization of the
discovery of our profound Dzokkin nature, nature, then what? There's two purpose or two
benefits that are completed to benefit. According to Buddha teaching, always in the teaching is
fulfilling the two goals, fulfilling the two purposes. That means fulfilling the goal of
one's own and fulfilling the goal of others. Why is so important in a Buddha's teaching or
particularly Mahayana teaching or the Vaidhyana teaching? Because of the Bodhisattva. To benefit
help between the others is Bodhisattva. Once you develop the Bodhisattva, whenever we develop the
Bodhisattva, it's not just ended when you become the Buddhahood. When you reach enlightenment,
then the true beneficial activity for all living beings are started. And how that started?
In the teaching said that whenever you know, in the debate, the permanent, pervasive,
sub-continuous. Three ways you're going to continue to benefit for all living beings.
That means when you reach enlightenment or now I reach enlightenment or become the Buddha,
I don't care. That's not. You are continually caring that Bodhisattva activities
until every living beings are completely reached enlightenment. For those reasons,
that's what's called permanent. Permanent, we can translate as continuation too.
Continuation, pervasive, and sub-continuous. That means without any effort.
Bodhisattva's enlightenment beneficial activity needs no effort. Not struggling, not forcing,
not dragging. It's simultaneously arising as it needed in order to benefit for all living beings.
So that is what. And then also it means, tone means, means temporarily benefit,
bring joy, peace, happiness to ourselves and help to the other beings and fulfilling the goal of
the
Bodhisattva or fulfilling the goal of six parameters actively involving that.
And now, next one is, here's the effortless. Effortless is generally in the Dzokhi teaching.
Dzokhi teachings are named as effortless yana, yana of effortless. There's another
se-no-nyam, sur-mi-ki-te-pa in Tibet. Sur-mi-ki-te-pa means tupa or yana of no efforts.
That indicated that all the other yanas need effort, but Dzokhi don't need effort
in the teaching. For that reason, se-no-nyam of Dzokhi is sur-mi-ki-te-pa or effortless yanas.
And that is what all yana means, of course you all know, but I will list the names of those yanas.
Grecian teacher, Bodhisattva came to give the teachings as a staircase,
first step, second step, third step, fourth step. So one after another he give those
teachings as staircase. So that means the first step is the foundation of the second steps.
It's not something that is we have to neglect it or the unnecessary, no necessity. All is connected
.
First step is of course first. It can be easy to climb, to set up our feet, but it's so important,
third and fourth and fifth, all that steps. So all that teaching. And those teachings,
those steps, that yana teachings, what are known as those are the, then, that's in it.
Sharaka yana means, at the beginning, the Buddha's teachings, such as the
poor, noble, truth teachings. Those are all the Sharaka teachings and as well as known as
Parthika Buddha teaching or yanas. Sharaka yana, Parthika Buddha yana. I'm sure you all know that,
but if you don't know, I translated that. Sharaka means like listener and what you listened,
and you're also explaining that to the others. Yana of the listening and explaining or pronouncing
that exactly what you heard, that means not changing things, not changing or not alternating,
not adding our own kind of ideas and all that, trying to make kind of editing things is not,
it's just pronouncing exactly what you heard. From who? According to Buddhism, Buddha teaching,
what you heard from the Buddha Shakta Muni and expounding that exactly to the others,
those who are interested. So those are known as Sharaka yanas. And the Parthika Buddha yana is
individual yana of the individual enlightened beings. That means there are certain groups,
practitioners, they are very personal. They don't like to socialize too much, they like to be
engaged in one's own places and just be like more hermitage style. So those are known as
individually
awakened Buddha, but which is the category belongs with connected with the Sharaka yanas,
the first yanas according to the same. Similar, they are similar, even they have some slightly,
I mean some degree of difference, realization, those are explaining. And after that, third one
is the Bodhisattva yanas. That is Mahayana, then you all know Bodhisattva yana. And the fourth one
is the, then from port and from port to this, until ninth is the Vaidhyana teachings, Vaidhyana.
And Vaidhyana is a diamond vehicles or yana is vehicles or lipped, one who lipped up that.
So diamond vehicles. And that is then the Shikarayana, Upayana, and Yogayana, you all
heard that, know that. And then those are three outer tandras or yanas. And three inner tandrayanas
are then Mahayoga, Anoyoga, and Atayoga. So this now Atayoga is a synonym of zukin and as well as,
I'm saying effortless yanas, those all. And that means now all these Atayanas had the effort,
but zukin is, has effortless. That's so, so is a synonym, synonyms. Why is also called,
because of all those nine Atayanas, when it's compared to the zukin, they are, in a way,
homopedic styles, homopedic styles, because the conception is displaying conceptions.
All conceptions are helping to the conceptions. And how? For example, in the teachings,
we use the examples. For example, in permanent conception, if you got understand what means
in permanent when you when we got the realization that in permanent, it will help notion of the
permanent. So that means permanent is the conception in permanent is a conception. But one is
helping to
take care of the other. So which is true about a conception? What is true? In permanent is true,
according Buddhism. Permanent is not true. It's not relevant. It's not realistic.
In permanent is truth. What the greatest teacher Buddha Shakyamuni teaching, he said,
he says truth, where things are. But I did not give any kind of like esoteric something that
never exists. But I get what things are, where things are. For that reason, but as synonym,
synonym of Buddha called truth, the speaker, truth, the speakers speak truth. What is this?
And then Buddha is teaching, for example, for example, one thing, also egolessiness,
egolessiness teaching, again, egolessiness is a conception. But that conception help me to the
ego, cling it, cling it to the ego. And which is true? Then egolessiness is true. There is no egos
according to Buddhism. There is no I. It didn't mean that we cannot use that terminology,
but there is no truth existing as we believe. Actually, there is nothing existing that truly
exists at all. So that's the way, kind of, it's just that in the bodhijata, for example,
it's a conception relative to the bodhijata I'm talking, it's conception. When that
conception help to what? It helps or it's subdue, it's explained self-important conception,
self-important conception, both the conception, but which is good. Bodhijata is good,
because self-important, that cling it to our self, is all sorts of troubles in the samsara.
And we think really carefully, in the teachings said, but not just that, in carefully,
and we started thinking one's own self too much. One important self-centered mind
is a troublemaker. It's a troublemaker in the families, troublemaker among the groups,
friends, troublemaker in the neighborhood or villages, it's troublemaker in the countries,
troublemaker in the large, self-centered, self-important, self-centered.
So if we like to have the happiness, peace, then bodhijata, the relative bodhijata, open heart,
relaxed, calm, peaceful, if we bring more friends, more harmonious, more peaceful,
more calm, peaceful, more friendships, we don't have, we have the really true bodhijata,
we never have to feel lonely. We have so many friends, all have become, and become also more wise,
it's true, more smart, more sensible, more common sense. All those abundance of goodness
will come. They are conceptions, but they are so good, really so good, it will benefit,
benefit to me, to all the other beings. So those are, until that generally in the
teaching, he said, until Dzogchen is a conception by helping to the conceptions.
By skill means by the Buddha, showed all those techniques, but everyone teaching is leading to
the wondrous donations, to Dzogchen, to that Dzogchen which I explained as a great master
postul chenze is leading. So that means the old Buddha's teaching, 84,000 teachings of Buddhas,
is teaching all leading to discovering this, that our ordinary inherited nature of the Dzogchen,
Dzogchen, or our inherited great awareness. So that is the general meaning of the Dzogchen.
And then Dzogchen teaching itself, just as a great master,
master, kiri-sena, summarized Dzogchen teachings into three groups, not three groups. So
kiri-sena summarized Dzogchen, that three sections of Dzogchen teaching, mind section of Dzogchen
teaching, space section of Dzogchen teaching, pit instruction sections of the Dzogchen teaching,
those three sections, Simde, Lungde, Mengade, and I'm sure many of you know already that also,
those three, the great master, Shiri-sena, subdivided that third section of Mengade,
Mengade, and those are subject, how much he made, four sections he did, he subdivided,
or if we can't relate to distillizing of the teaching, so more kind of like essence to bring
one's own self to get realizations, or get directly connected to the primordial our natures.
And that is, and those are the words in the teaching said outer sections, inner sections,
secondary sections, most of the secondary sections, mostly secondary sections, in the turbid, and
this
is called, chaikor, nankor, samokor, yansin, lana, mebokor, so the essence, supreme essence
sections teaching. This supreme essence section teaching, that is what we are practicing these days
.
The old zoki teaching, that is really what we are, so that means even the zoki teaching,
and all that zoki teaching, the mind section, space section, with instructions, we are boiled
down to the to those great masters, this linear master, through their kindness, boiled down,
we are really like prepared, they prepare us to connect to the, as the mostly inner most of the
teachings, essence, essence. That practice, or that teaching, or that practices, is dividing the
two that you all know. Those are known as gada tikkyu practices, and it's learned up togal
practices.
Gada tikkyu, and it's learned up togal practices. All simple way to tell tikkyu practices,
and toga practices. And of course, many of you all know, but again, I'm just reminded to each other
,
and just in a way, to reactivate our all the knowledge, the teachings, and the tikkyu means
cutting thoroughly, or instantly cutting, without the cuttle, and what to cut, what's called beyond
the subject, object activities. If I use simple knowledge, simple language, cut that instantly.
What the cuts? Cut all the dualities, duality instantly, or in other words,
obscurations, or in other words, the completely clinging, grasping, cut instantly.
Without cuttle, that cuts, and all subject, and object, and activities. That is tikkyu.
And togal practices is translated many times, leaping over, leaping over instantly,
from samsara to the enlightenment status, instantly. So those are known togal practices,
togal practices. So this is kada tikkyu and toga practice. This, again, in the teaching,
in the teaching said, kada tikkyu practice, tikkyu practice is effortless practices.
Practice of the effortless, don't need effort, practices. And toga practice is with effort.
Both are dukki practices. What is the difference between these two? We're going to really highlight
that. The tikkyu is more focused to the emptiness aspect of the rukba, on its own awareness. That
is
tikkyu practices. Toga is more highlighted or focused to the clarity aspect of the
nature of the rukba. That is the difference. Otherwise, both are both status. There are no
separations, no separations, or no divisions. Both are the same. So now, tikkyu practice
is many times in the teaching said, effortless practices. Why? Because once you receive the
teaching, once you got the understanding of the recognizing our own awareness of the rukba,
then there's no need, any effort. Effort is hindrance.
Effort is the dualities. Effort is the publications. Therefore, what in the teaching said, relax.
Be in that status. And we don't distract it. Why is it distracted? Because the distraction
is the dualities. If carried by that, so then, again, we are not in the natural status.
Therefore, don't be what's called mindfulness. Be aware. Be aware. Effort. And relax that.
Throw the whole different way to abiding those teaching said. And so, you relax.
Then why is the teaching both the same, but why? Toga teachings are named with effort.
Because toga teaching, as many of you received teaching, you practice it. Those are known as
always explaining, explaining of the three postures when you do the toga practices.
Three ways to gaze. Three ways to gaze. Three ways for station. Three ways to gaze. And three ways
to essentials of the object and eye and awareness and wind. Those, many times,
if you highlight, you have to focus those things. So therefore, it's known as effort.
You need effort. But reality is also effortless to compare with all the others. It is instantly
zoki teaching is connecting to the ordinary, primordial nature. The ordinary raka, precious
raka, is really connecting to that without any delays or without any kind of gap. Instantly,
you connect with the ordinary nature. For that reason, zokin is known as then the yana of the
result, or yana of the wisdom. For those reasons, thinking only on that, that, kind of thinking on
that, great master Sajya Pandita in the teaching said, and how zokin can be yana, because it is
versatile. How can be yana? Because yana means, yana is a Sanskrit word which means
lifter, one who's lifting up or many times translated as weaker from one place to the other
place, lifting out. But zokin is already in that wisdom status. Why is it known as yana?
That is it. That was it. Because of this instantly connecting to this primordial
wisdom without any powers or stopping. That is what really is called effortless meditation.
The next one is the essential point of the effortless performed meditation,
meditation, and then translated here. This maybe didn't translate exactly. Namjir means
what's called? Namjir means yogi. Yogi or namjir means also what actually means yogi.
I think many of you know yoga. Yogi is a practitioner and yoga means what actually?
Yoga means being in nature or being in nature as nature is. I think that's it. And it's very
translated, namjir. Namjir means one is mastering or capturing the way that nature is. That is
really the yogi, also yoga. And yogi means the one who's doing that. So this means one could
practicing without effort and discovering our ultimate goal of the of the rukba as is our
ultimate nature of the rukba. It is essential to reach enlightenment within this lifetime
and to verify all the habits and observations. That is essential. There's nothing more essential
than that in this sense. Why this is essential? Because whatever we developed with our rukba,
we're going to continue to enjoy and reach enlightenment for all the time. It's not
something that we're going to leave behind or going to change. It is really the essential.
Essential of this lifetime, essential of the bardo, and essential in the next lifetime.
It's all the time. It's excellent, essential. So that is what this teaching is going to explain
of this teach. So that is really my meaning of this title. And now we go to the to the
the homage. And now it's actually divided in the according to it and what's called this name.
The teaching is divided into the title, teaching, and then colophones. So that we went
briefly about the colophones. Now we go to teaching. Teaching is also many times divided
in different sections, many kind of subdivisions. But this time we go to like kind of a truth.
And so that is the first, the homage. And then second is the teaching itself. You go to it. And
then, so that's what it is. The now homage is here. The great master Mohoramud said, "Homage
to Gharap and Masambhava." So that's it. So that's it. I think you all know. So I don't have to use
so many of my broken language to explain. So that's it. Homage to Gharap and Masambhava. By who?
That we all, all the practitioners, everyone who is reading these books will participate. And then,
of course, Gharap and Masambhava is the object of rafu all the time by all means by everyone. So
therefore really we pay homage. So now I go over this. Again, we all know Gharap and Masambhava.
Gharap and Masambhava is the Buddha of the generations. Gharap and Masambhava is totally
enlightened beings, both at a relative level and absolute levels. And what the great master
Jangmukundra said in one of his Thelma teachings. He said, "You who," to Sanjukund, "you who hold
all the, all the activity of the, all the Buddhas of three times," to Sanjukund.
"And you performed all the activities of the Buddhas in Bodhisattvas of all the times."
And you want to hear, "You also ruled all the pure land of three caayas,
pure land of the dharmakaya, and pure land of the sambhokaya, and pure land of the narmakaya.
You rules, ruled all that." Who is that? That is Gharap and Masambhava.
So therefore, you are the Lord of all the families of the Buddhas.
For that I postulate it. This is what it is. Gharap and Masambhava is not just one single
object, one single lama. Gharap and Masambhava is the regent of all the Buddhas and all the
enlightenment beings of the past, and as well as in the futures, and as well as in ours.
So Buddhas of the Bodhisattvas, all the Vidyadharas, enlightened beings of the past,
present, and future, represented of that. And a protector of all the beings, every living being.
According to Gharap and Masambhava's teachings, in the life story they're reading by Yisin Thodyam,
in the life, in the liberation of Gharap and Masambhava, every six frames there is so many
emanations of Gharap and Masambhava helping the supporters. Gharap and Masambhava is beyond the
death and the birth, totally enlightened beings. Gharap and Masambhava is, came in the form,
Amitabha, of the, in the human or in the way, in this world, world to protect and help to all the
beings, and particularly the generation of times. And Gharap and Masambhava is reincarnation of the
Buddhashyakya Munis. Also, that what Buddhashyakya Munis said in the Sutturis, and Ananda, and as
well as all the disciples, he should not get upset that I'm entering Mahaparinaranas, but I will be
back at this, known as Gharap and Masambhava, even better than me, he said. There's nothing is
better
than Buddhashyakya Muni, but Buddhashyakya Muni like to highlight of his reincarnation of
manifestations,
manifestations. Many cases also said, because what is that mean? Gharap and Masambhava, where he
appeared in this world as instantly rebirth, miracle is a birth, in the middle of a lot of
as eight-year boys. And also, then Gharap and Masambhava is beyond death, because transcendental
Western Rambo body. Therefore, in the, Buddha also mentioned, why? Because the Buddha was born,
and the Buddha was in a way left, even though there is no really, you know, livings that, but
Buddha left, left. But Gharap and Masambhava is beyond. And then Gharap and Masambhava is
great Buddhas of all the Vajrayana practitioners, Buddha of all the times. In a debate, all the
different schools, we have Buddhist schools, but those great masters, most of those great masters,
we read the books of their, their books, always mentioning, they received the blessings of Gharap
and Masambhava, either in the dream, or in a vision, or in the direct perceptions, really, all that
.
It's not just, I'm making up this, you can read life stories with this, this, that's, it's not
just a kind of selected, occupied by the Numa practitioners. It's Buddha, it's Buddha for all,
everyone's, everyone. And then Gharap and Masambhava is the Buddha of these generations,
right now. All the different troubles, difficulties arise, according to teaching,
and according to great masters, really now. And in the teaching, say that among all the male Budd
has,
Gharap and Masambhava is swept in the Buddha of the Degeneration. Among all the female Buddhas,
Dara is the most powerful and swept and Buddha of the Degeneration times. So that's what this
Gharap and Masambhava is. So therefore, because, and know the value of the importance of this,
by great masters of how it is, then he pays homage. Lama Bhema Yunele Samsala. So that is just one
way,
understand. And now the second way, kind of explain him, if I go word by word with this, this, this
,
again in Tibet, he said, Lama Bhema Yunele Samsala. That means, if he translated this,
homage to, oh yeah, he's already translated, homage to Gharap and Masambhava. So Guru is
intubated oscillator, or intubated word is called Lama. And then Bhema Yunele is Bhema Sambhava,
and homage is then to Sangachal. So that is exactly translated here.
What Lama means in intubated word, and of course you all know, Lama means, Lama is a Sanskrit word,
Lama is Sanskrit word, Guru is translated as Lama. And always in the teaching he said,
it has two meanings, higher one, and big callers, big callers, or heavy, heavy, dense, dense and
higher,
higher, and higher means what? In Bhruli, higher means one who's highly religious human beings,
higher, higher than one's own self. What sense higher? More knowledge, more understanding of
the teachings, more loving kindness, more compassion, more maybe practices, more experience,
those sense higher. It's higher, higher than my self. And then what is this? Again,
density means density of the, this is the metaphor, of course, density of the realizations,
realizations in the qualities are dense. What qualities, qualities or knowledge,
and we call it or knowledge, call it or knowledge. What qualities? In Buddhism, always teaching
said
long qiu, top qiu, call it of the knowledge of all the scriptures of Buddha teaching,
and a realization of all that teachings, teaching what explaining, what those explaining,
the old Buddha teaching, that all know, samurai, again, samurai is three extra-only trainings,
extra-only the practice of the morality, extra-only the practice of the concentration, extra-only
the
practice of the verse terms. So that realization, three extra-only realizations that individual has
.
But then Gharipayama sambhava is way beyond his total enlightenings. So his full verse terms,
poor realizations, realizations, generally talking about llamas. Llama means also if we translated
that into English, Gharip means teacher. In teaching in Buddhism, of course, teacher is so
important. Teacher is so important, and he says that when you have the, with all the teachers,
there is no realization will come. Even in the Buddha teaching said, all the Buddhas of 1000,
1000 Buddhas are always contrary with Buddhas, teachers. One thousand Buddhas who are going to
come, some came, some going to, more than going to come, but they all had teachers.
Without teacher, there is no Buddhas. This is true, everything, all really important,
teachers are so important. Those teachings are then, as we can go maybe later over those things,
but in a really, in a teaching, particularly in going about that teaching, there is six different
teachers, six different teachers. I will list those, and many of you already know that,
those six different teachers. First is general teachers. Second is then Dharma teachers. Third
is then one who give the empowerment and the transmissions. And the fourth is one who give the,
also, also what's called this, or support and the guiding of our continual practice, Samayas,
Samayas. And the fourth, the fifth is one who's explaining the teachings, Sottara and Dandaras.
And then sixth one is who bring the instructions. This is, of course, there's six different
categories, the men, but it's the categories, but that could be even one teacher performing all
those, all pre-teachers doing all that things. So those are the, like, categories of the teachers,
the lama or the gurus, that. Then even they are, those are the categories, but they need
qualifications,
qualities. Those qualities are explained by the Buddha teachings. Buddha teachings,
teachings in, in a, in a Sottara or in a, in a Theravada or in Vinaya teaching,
and as well as bodhisattva yanas, and as well as vedayana teachings. So those all need
qualifications.
Once you have these qualifications, great masters, then really it's a current teaching that is then
,
if you are truly secure of the spiritual, of looking to the practitioner, that is just truly
rewarding to our practices. Then that's so important and it's so good. And we can go over
those things later too. Thanks more. Thank you very much everyone again for your participation.
Thank you everyone. Okay. Thank you. I started. Thank you. We do first minute meditation and then
We dedicate, a short dedication. Thank you. Thank you everyone again.